Altick ECReaderFicPoe ReadMe

This list is based off of Appendix B “Best-sellers” from Richard D. Altick’s The English Common Reader:  A Social History of the Mass Reading Public 1800-1900.  

Edition consulted:  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Altick produced this list to provide some very preliminary guidance on nineteenth-century bestsellers.  The titles included in Altick’s list are by no means authoritative nor are the claims of popularity behind them cross-checked for accuracy in any way.  For each corresponding title, Altick cites at least one contemporary claim that a given work sold well.  Therefore, the claims are a mix of best-sellers, “quick-sellers” (titles that had immediate but brief success), and “steady-sellers” (titles whose sales were modest but prolific).  

It would be worthwhile to reproduce Altick’s cautionary preface regarding these selections:  “Gathered as they are from all kinds of sources, these figures run the whole gamut of authenticity, from the reasonably accurate (Dickens’ novels) to the extravagant (the crime broadsides).  No attempt has been made to sift or check them, and they are presented here simply for whatever they are worth” (381).

In Altick’s original list, he also offers titles for “Nonce Literature,” “Juvenile Literature,” “Textbooks, Reference Works, etc,” and “Miscellaneous.”  This list only accumulates those titles present in HathiTrust and cited under Altick’s lists for fiction and poetry.

Note:  Altick has since published two supplemental lists that expand upon his earlier list:

Altick, Richard D.: "Nineteenth-Century English Best-Sellers: A Further List." Studies in Bibliography: papers of the Bibliographical Society of the University of Virginia (Charlottesville, VA) , XXII, 197-206. (1969) 

Altick, Richard D.: "Nineteenth-century best-sellers: a third list." Studies in Bibliography: papers of the Bibliographical Society of the University of Virginia (Charlottesville, VA) (39) 235-41. (1986)
————
Column Ids

*Jgenre: All titles in this list are fiction.  This column just provides “fic” to affirm that genre affiliation.
*firstpub: Because in some cases, the earliest available “complete” edition of a title is a later edition or reprint, I provide the date of original publication cited by Leavis in her list.